The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today, presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this show is space exploration. We're putting two limitations on
that subject. One, that the exploration be outside the solar system. And two,
that the story or novel we discuss involve the process of searching or exploring
primarily, not simply the result of the exploration. And especially with those
limitations, I think we have perhaps the purest of all science fiction themes or
plots. Man's history on this planet has been a process of searching,
discovering, then taming or civilizing. The discovery of the New World, for
instance, was the result of a deliberate act of search by various European
explorers, culminating with Columbus. The American West, as discovered and
mapped by Lewis and Clark, is a classic example of exploration. Now, space, or
our galaxy, the universe, is simply the next area to explore and discover and
tame. I think the importance and purity of the theme lies in the notion that
searching and discovering is the very essence of human nature. It's at the
center of our survival instinct. Without it, we wouldn't be human. We've
conquered the frontiers of Earth, and now we're ready to confront, we must
confront, what one influential science fiction production has called the final
frontier.
Star Trek first came on the air in 1966 and continued through 1969 with 78
episodes being completed for the series. The show had several major science
fiction authors writing for it including Harlan Ellison, Theodore Sturgeon, and
David Gerrold. It'd be hard to think of a better example of the space
exploration theme. I think Star Trek epitomizes that because episode after
episode you saw the crew members of the Enterprise confront aliens, all sorts of
problems in a hostile universe, but they kept going. Their spirit, their
courage, their desire to go beyond mankind's limits almost carried the show for
a long time and I think it sort of is the essence of the space exploration theme
for pure exploration's sake. It was a fairly popular show when it was on the
air, but it gained in popularity considerably after it went off the air and went
into syndication. Conventions or held Star Trek conventions and it eventually
spawned a movie. Well fitting in with your parameters on space exploration, we
never saw the Enterprise going on a particular mission to do something in
particular. It was always just out there exploring and with no particular thing
in mind and whatever happened to it seemed to happen by accident or just it just
happened. They were out there and an alien ship advanced upon them or they found
some planet with a distress signal calling out, but they were never really going
to any particular place as far as we were told. I believe that really is kind of
covered in the preamble to the show where William Shatner says they're on that
five-year mission to explore new planets and discover what's out there. I think
that has to be one of the reasons the show is so popular again because simply it
satisfies people's need for the unknown, for the search, for the exploration, to
seek something which is mysterious, which is unknown. It simply caught the
imagination, I think, of more than pure science fiction fans. I think everybody
was fascinated with that kind of theme. I think this is especially shown in the
episode called The Side of Paradise. Yes, I think they did that theme a number
of times, or not a number, but every so often. I think that particular episode
is the best expression of it, but they advanced to this particular planet and
beamed down as they did on their transporters. There was a particular plant on
this planet that shot spores whenever one of the crew members got near it, and
these spores would seemingly well, cause a state of total happiness, total
contentment in the individual. He didn't have a sense of a goal. He didn't want
to strive. He simply wanted to stagnate. I'm reminded of the poem by Tenneyson,
The Lotos-Eaters, where the crew of Ulysses ate the lotus plant and wanted to
stay on the island forever without moving, without striving, without trying.
Kirk, the captain, Captain Kirk is one of the few who was not infected by the
spores. And with his, the power of his personality, his cleverness, he is able
to overturn the influence these spores have had on his crew members. But I think
the significance of it is that they are going to continue. They're not
satisfied. They're not content. They would have been perfectly happy to live the
rest of their existence on this planet. It was sort of an Eden, a paradise. But
that's not enough for people. They need a goal. They need something to strive
for, or they're not human. And Kirk is able to get the crew members back to
their original states, and the enterprise goes on. For an example of a novel
that deals strictly in this type of space exploration, let's turn to a novel
called The Voyage of the Space Beagle. It was written by A. E. van Vogt in 1950.
It's actually a collection of four short stories that he tied together with a
new character. The original short stories were "Black Destroyer" and "Discord in
Scarlet", written in 1939, "M33 in Andromeda", written in 1943, and "War of Nerves",
written in 1950. These four stories he took and tied together with the theme of
going out and exploring space, with these four episodes becoming four things
that happened to the ship and the people on it. In each of the stories, we meet
a different kind of alien and have to deal with it in a life and death
situation. The first of these episodes takes place when the crew lands on an
alien planet and is discovered by a creature named Coeurl. Coeurl is a cat-like
creature, and he soon lures his way on board the ship. The scientists are very
eager to study him and see what his physiological makeup is like, how his
psychology has adapted him to this type of planet, and generally what he is.
Elliot Grosvenor, the main character that ties the stories together, is somewhat
suspect of Coeurl, and his suspicions are well-founded. In an accident, they
discover that Coeurl can control electrical energies through his body, and once
Coeurl discovers that the human beings have learned this from him, he becomes
immediately very fearful of them. He's a very, very powerful creature, and they
lock him inside a cage, but he manages to negate the electronic lock and get out
and starts horribly killing the crewman, and then running back to the cell and
locking him back inside it, hoping to create a panic on board the ship. The crew
almost immediately discovers what is happening and becomes a war between the
crew and the creature. And in the end, Coeurl leaves the ship by means of a
lifeboat. Because he doesn't understand the faster-than-light drive on the ship,
he attempts to fly back toward his planet, but he's traveling away from his
planet faster than he is traveling toward it when he leaves the ship, and even
though he's flying toward his planet, his planet still recedes into the
distance, and he goes insane trying to figure this out. The second episode in
the book, which is one of the original short stories, is about a race of aliens
that are very bird-like, called the Riim, or the Riim people. They have an
entirely mental existence. They communicate by telepathy, and they try to
contact the Space Beagle with their mental emanations through telepathy, and
they're friendly. All they want to do is contact the ship, but it creates havoc
on the Space Beagle. This mental power that enters the spaceship drives some of
the men mad. It causes psychological aberrations. It brings out hostilities. It
exaggerates certain mental conditions in the crew. And Grossvener, the same one
who was suspicious of the Coeurl in the previous episode, is able, with his
specialized equipment, to mentally contact the Riim, to let them know what's
happening, and ask them to call off their attack, which is done, and the Space
Beagle is allowed to continue. The third section of the book deals with a
somewhat different type of alien. The Space Beagle is voyaging between galaxies
in intergalactic space where there is absolutely nothing. When all of a sudden
they come across the path of an alien who seems to be floating in this
intergalactic void. The alien had no hope of ever reaching one of the galaxies.
He was stranded out there when the ship just happened to pass by. And the alien
immediately taps some of the energy from the drive of the ship and stops the
ship dead in its tracks. The humans crawl out of the ship and fix the exterior.
And then they notice the alien floating right by the ship. The alien comes
aboard the ship after they try to capture him in a cage and immediately
recognizes the situation as being very advantageous to him. This creature is
extremely powerful and he's from an ancient civilization that existed in the
previous cycle of the universe. When that universe exploded, this creature was
shot out into the place where they found him without any hope of gaining access
to a galaxy. When he meets the men, he is able to use them as host creatures or
bodies for his eggs in order to raise up more of these creatures. The Ixtl, as
the alien is called in the book, takes over part of the ship and it's really a
race between him and the rest of the humans as to who's going to control. If the
humans allow him to gain the upper hand, he will eventually control all of the
galaxy that they're going to. The only way that the humans could rid themselves
of Ixtl was by using their mental agility and leaving the ship long enough that
they could impose a force field of energy that would kill the creature. The
creature found out what they were doing just in time to escape and he got back
into his original fix floating out in the middle of intergalactic space with no
hope of ever gaining access to the galaxy as the humans went on to their next
episode. The last one involves a creature very difficult to describe. It's sort
of a cloud, a huge cloud creature without any particular name, but it feeds on
death. It started out as a very small, small organism. First of all, it fed on
the deaths of insects, then smaller animals and larger animals. It kept growing
all the while and it's gotten so huge that it needs the the deaths of creatures
on an entire planet to exist. So it's gained the power and the size and the
strength to terraform planets. And as the Space Beagle goes through a particular
system, they find that all of the planets they're passing are similar. They're
covered with tropical vegetation, with large primitive kinds of animals engaged
in conflict which leads to to many deaths that this creature is feeding on. The
scientists on the Space Beagle figure out what's happening and realize that
their own solar system is in great danger because this creature is expanding all
the time and they're afraid it's going to come to their own solar system. So
they devise a plan whereby they they start destroying the planets that the
creature is feeding on and lure him out into interstellar space where he is not
able to feed so that he is going to, he will, we know, die away from the source
of the death which nourishes him. So again, through their cleverness, through
their ingenuity, the humans have triumphed over an alien which, when you come
right down to it, is much more powerful than they are. And I believe that
typifies a lot of the things in the novel in that the humans are always
overcoming their adversaries by means of their cleverness. They seem to outwit
aliens that are much more powerful than they are physically and in some
instances by specialized powers that they have. Coeurl could manipulate
electromagnetic energies and Ixtl could move through solid matter. But even with
these abilities, the humans by their own ingenuity could outwit their
adversaries. I think we should say something for the aliens though. In most of
the pulp novels of the time that this one was written, we have so many of the
bug-eyed monsters that are nothing more than monsters. Here we have aliens that
are truly intelligent and are fighting humans on a much greater level than just
physical terror. They're well thought out. They have purpose and a plan. We can
say that these are really better aliens than what you would expect to find in
most of the pulp novels of this type. I think that tradition, that change in the
way the bug-eyed monsters were written about in science fiction came back in the
30s with Stanley Weinbaum, Martian Odyssey. Asimov is described that as the
first science fiction story in which the aliens are not simply humans in a
strange form. They have their own reasons for existing. They have their own
ecology. They belong to a particular planet and they're a part of that planet. I
think all of the aliens in this particular book are realistic in terms of having
an ecology built around them and having a psychology, a physiology which is not
human. How shall we characterize this novel then? Is it pulp fiction or is it
something superior to that? Well, when Van Vogt started writing the stories, he
was writing in the pulp tradition. It was still in the late 30s when he started
to write these stories which became the Space Beagle. But I think he goes beyond
that. Even though he was trained in the pulp tradition, I think he has more
skill. He's more modern, perhaps under the influence of the editor John
Campbell. And he's able to go beyond the pulp formulas. These are realistic
aliens. The humans in the book are characterized by realistic motives. They're
not simply the plain hero types. They have their quirks. They have their bad
points. The humans do. In fact, they all have to overcome the bad parts of human
nature before they can defeat the aliens themselves. So I think this is a step
beyond the pulp tradition, even though the formulas and all the intentions of
the story, I think, are the same as the early pulp magazines. But Van Vogt is
able to go beyond that.
For our second consideration, we turn to a novel by Poul Anderson written in
1970. Tau Zero is a special kind of a science fiction book. There's not very
many just like it. That's only one category that Anderson writes with is the
kind of book that Tau Zero is. He writes almost anything. He writes pure
fantasy. He'll write so-called soft or social science fiction. But there's
nobody better at writing hard science fiction than Poul Anderson. I think Tau
Zero is perhaps his best example in that particular form because there's a great
deal of science in the book. And some readers might even think that it's a
little obtrusive if they don't understand some of the concepts of relativity and
the Bussard ramjet, for instance. The science in the novel actually makes it
extremely realistic. It's one of the more believable of the pure space epics
that's ever been written. The story is essentially that of a colony ship, a ship
full of people, I think about 50 people who are traveling to a colony at a
nearby star to set up and start life there. And on the way, after they've gone
part of the way toward the star, the ship runs into a small nebula of gas, which
causes the ship to lose its power of deceleration. They cannot decelerate
without causing so much radiation harm that they would all be killed. The only
way that they can hope to exist is to keep on accelerating until they can get to
a place that is relatively free of gas, where they can go outside the ship,
outside of the protective barriers and shielding of the ship to repair that
deceleration device. The story that develops is that the ship cannot find a
place that is free enough of gas that they can go out and repair the ship. And
it keeps on accelerating until it's actually going through galaxies. But no
matter how fast they go, they can never go beyond the speed of light, because
Anderson, as we've said before, is extremely true to the scientific knowledge of
our day. And according to the knowledge that we have, faster than light travel
is impossible. So he has to dream up a method whereby this exploration trip can
go fast enough to get somewhere. And he's devised, or he's used, a ship called
the Bussard Ramjet to do this. The Bussard Ramjet is not a new idea. It was
invented somewhere in the middle of this century. The basic format is that the
ship picks up interstellar gas molecules by the use of a huge electromagnetic
web of sorts, a force field, if you will, that scoops up these interstellar
particles and shoots them out the back end. This provides reaction mass, which
drives the ship forward. The point is that the faster the ship goes, the more
gas molecules it supposedly will contact and shoot out the back end, thereby
increasing its speed more and more and more on a vicious cycle.
The ship would be extremely radioactive or radiative to the point where there
would be needed extreme shielding for any human beings to be able to ride the
thing. I believe in the works of Larry Niven, he had the same kind of a ship
that was not habitable. He had robots that used this ship, and everybody else
had to come along on the slow boats. Here, however, Poul Anderson has had this
ship big enough and sealed well enough that humans can ride it. The trouble is,
when they hit that gas cloud, that it not only destroyed their deceleration
method, it also sped them up quite a bit to the point where they were already
past where they would have had to stop and turn around and slow down to get to
their original destination. The speed of the ship is one of the basic problems
the crew must overcome. The great speed brings the theory of relativity into
play. One of the basic concepts of the theory of relativity is that the speed
that time passes is relative to the speed that an object is moving. If you have
two ships traveling through space, with ship A traveling faster than ship B,
time will be moving slower on ship A than on ship B. In other words, the faster
a ship moves, the slower time passes on that ship relative to other slower
-moving objects surrounding it. Everything appears normal on the ship to the
crew, and time seems to be passing faster on objects traveling slower than the
ship. As hours and days pass on the ship, months and years pass on Earth, and
the faster they travel, the greater this time difference becomes. Eventually,
the crew, while traveling between galaxies, watches the universe collapse into a
huge mass. This ties in the current, currently accepted theories of the origin
of the universe by most of the scientific world. The Big Bang Theory, of course,
in which the universe began as one monomass of energy that explodes outward.
There are two currently popular views of this. One is that the universe would
then continue to expand until it eventually burnt itself out, and that would be
all a one-time-only affair. Or that the universe would again withdraw by
gravitational force back into a monomass and explode again, thus doing it
numerable times, limitless times. This is the cyclic theory, and this is what
Poul Anderson portrays in Tau Zero. The people on board the ship go so fast that
the universe dies around them. The time has passed exterior to the ship in great
quantities. Of course, Earth and all of its peoples, and assumably humankind, is
long gone, and they are the only ones left. And they're waiting out the result
of this withdrawal of the universe back into a monomass to see what happens.
Hopefully, for them, it will explode again. It's one of the things that Anderson
tries to bring across is the incredible amount of time that has passed while
they've been on this incredibly fast flight across the universe. Millions and
billions of years have passed as the universe contracts back down into one large
monomass before it explodes back out and creates new galaxies, new solar
systems. And at the end of the novel, they eventually land on one. They are able
to slow down, and they land on one and begin to colonize. And presumably, then,
they will carry on the human race simply from the 50 members on this ship that
have survived into a new universe. To me, that's one of the most fascinating of
all journeys of exploration is to see the death of a universe in the beginning
of another one. That's fascinating the way Anderson treats that material. It's
ultimately very optimistic. I think it's the essence of the exploration theme,
to strive, to seek, to never give up. And particularly with two characters on
the book, I think we see Anderson attempting to show two sides of human nature
that allow it to persist and to survive. You have a woman, Ingrid Lindgren, who
is second in command on the ship. She epitomizes feeling, emotion, love,
compassion. We have Charles Reymont, who is the, I guess you'd call him the
policeman, the only military man on board who is there to keep order. He is pure
practicality, pure survival. He'll do anything to survive. He's very an
emotional, very practical man. Together, those two are able to keep the crew
intact. They're able to give it hope. And they are the ones who are able to,
well, allow the crew to survive into this new universe where, you know, where
humanity will keep going. The Voyage of the Space Beagle and Tau Zero, I think
we would call two of the more classic treatments of the space exploration theme.
But there are many and ingenious methods, many varied ways that authors have
come up with to illustrate that particular theme. Always, I think, showing the
desire of the human spirit to escape any kind of restraint. I want a ride to the
ridge where the west commences and gaze at the moon till I lose my senses and I
can't look at harbors and I can't stand fences. Don't fence me in.
One early example, I think, and probably still one of the more popular ones is
the idea that Heinlein illustrated in Orphans of the Sky, published from two
earlier short stories in 1941. He uses the device of a generation ship, which is
an artificial world, complete and self-sufficient, constructed and inhabited by
human beings, which is sent slowly toward the stars. The original members won't
live to arrive, of course, but their descendants will, many generations removed.
And that is one method of space exploration, although one which is a little
discouraging, I guess, to the original crew. In the film Dark Star, the
protagonists are traveling throughout our galaxy, discovering new solar systems
which have habitable planets on them and destroying all the unstable planets in
that system in order to make the system safe for colonization. And one other
rather unusual story we might mention is by Larry Niven. It's called Rammer. It
was a short story and then made into a novel, A World Out of Time. Here a corpsicle,
a person who has had himself frozen in order that he might be revived
later for medical treatment, I think the fellow had cancer or some such disease,
awakes into a future society where they want him for only one purpose or they
don't want him at all, and that's to pilot a starship. The fellow is amazed, but
he goes along with it because it's his only hope for life, takes the starship
and escapes away from the society that has programmed him to do their seeding of
planets that they want him to do, and goes out on his own to explore the galaxy
or whatever he finds that meets his interest.
Space exploration is the cornerstone of postulative fiction, for the Earth is
well known and has become a very small place in a very big universe. If man is
to leave the Earth, as he has already begun to do, he will have to explore,
whether it's for the sake of exploring or for practical reasons of colonization
and exploitation or both. Although there are science fiction stories that do not
deal in off-Earth settings, the majority by far are based on the assumption of
space travel and exploration, as we try to imagine what could lie ahead for
humanity in the worlds of tomorrow.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson. This has been the Science
Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association in conjunction with KOCV-FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.